I knew I would marry my husband the night I met him. Jim is genuine and kind. He is that rarest thing in New York City: a man who wants to be in a relationship. He likes to say he is from Pennsylvania, so he knows how to nail the weathervane to the deck and repair a broken lock. He brings me coffee in bed every morning, exactly how I take it, with too much half and half, and he came to all eight rounds of chemotherapy when I was being treated for breast cancer – long days in the basement infusion center of Mount Sinai hospital. My husband is calm. Not a lot gets to him – I don’t get to him, and I am difficult. I am an impossible person, really, which I am not proud of (but I must be, or I would not say so). I have a yeshiva education, so I am Talmudic. I have a Yale Law degree, so I am Constitutional. I love technicalities. I love details. I remember everything. It is no fun to argue with me, unless you love to argue. And I guess I must love it, because it happens all the time – I accidentally argue. I slip, fall and land on an argument. I insist that it’s not what I’m doing. I promise that we do not at all disagree, except that you are wrong and I am right. Everyone is entitled to my opinion – and my opinion is fact. What can I say? I am a lover of discourse. I can’t help myself. I could only ever be married to my husband, who was raised Episcopalian but now only adheres to the tenets of mellow. He does not engage. My husband tells me to relax whenever I am on a tirade. And then we put on Check Your Head and dance around. There is no problem that cannot be solved by the Beastie Boys. We got married because we have fun, alone, together. Of course, marriage is complicated. If your marriage is not complicated, what’s wrong with you? The opposite of complicated is resigned. When it stops being interesting, you have given up. But I am surprised by how I feel lately. Jim and I got married in May, and now people casually ask me “How’s married life?” the way they ask “How are you?” and expect the answer to always be “fine”. I always say, the same as before, because we live the way we did, in the same loft, with different levels but no doors, so it is as ever. I always just say, nothing has changed; we are the same. But marriage has also caught me off guard. Decades of therapy, not to mention recovery from drug addiction, never mind an accumulation of tripping over my own feet – well, I did not think I could be stunned. And I am, amazed and awestruck to find myself married. People casually ask me ‘How’s married life?’ the way they ask ‘How are you?’ and expect the answer to always be ‘fine’ I used to have a past, but now I have a future. Marriage is an intense institution. You commit to stay with your spouse no matter what, when it would be easier to walk away simply because you are annoyed. This is quite a deal we strike up: for better and for worse. What a crazy thing to agree to. And yet here we go. My husband and I were planning our wedding when I got breast cancer. The BRCA gene mutation makes for extreme tumors: I had stage one breast cancer to begin with, but by the time I had a double mastectomy, the cancer had spread to five lymph nodes, which is stage three. Suddenly I needed the strongest chemotherapy, followed by radiation treatment. But Jews do not postpone weddings, so we just kept planning. I remember a Jewish family who held a funeral and a wedding on the same day: they could neither postpone the nuptials nor wait longer than 24 hours to bury the dead, as prescribed by Halacha. I am not religious, but this rule makes sense to me: show up for your life as planned. Unless the question is about scheduling your own execution, now is always better than later. So we got married on a friend’s rooftop in Soho while I was in the middle of chemotherapy. During treatment I used the cold cap, a -32C (-25F) ice pack that I put on my head so as not to lose my hair. I still had lengths of blonde under a wreath of roses and purple flowers on my wedding day. I was 47 and it was my first time at the altar; my husband was 35. After we exchanged our vows, we saw a red heart-shaped balloon floating in the cornflower sky. Someone said it was a good omen, but I pointed out that great things like that happen in New York City all the time. They do. A couple of weeks ago the New York Times published an article about what it called the “ambivalent marriage”. Professors from Brigham Young University in Utah studied varying degrees of support and negativity in the daily lives of 94 married couples (with no children at home). Only 23% of the couples had a good marriage. The rest were bickering more than laughing. This scares me. The 77% who felt “ambivalent” about their marriages are the ones who stopped paying attention. It’s such an easy thing to do. Life gets busy, and the first person you take for granted is the one you live with. The best advice I have received was from a tax attorney: have sex five times a week and have separate bathrooms. I see why this works: if you do something fun quite regularly, and stay out of each other’s way, you have a better chance at a good marriage than a couple without habitual intimacy and defined space. The best advice I have received was from a tax attorney: have sex five times a week and have separate bathrooms Before I got married, no amount of counsel or rumination would have made me see how serious the bargain is, but I now feel the weight of wedded bliss on the other side of I do. It is heavy. It is years and years of figuring it all out. It isn’t that I feel I’ve made a mistake: I love my husband; I hope I die before him, because I do not want to be without him. But I thought marriage would be a continuum of our life before it. I must have been crazy to believe that making such a serious commitment would not be transformative. I now see everything with a new prescription; I see with the eyes of forever. As a wedding card we recently received said: Shit Just Got Serious. I did not take cancer seriously. I did not deal with it as the fight of my life; I made peace with it right away. I turned the disease over to the best doctors I could find, and got on with things. Cancer did not change my perspective. Not at all. It did nothing to make me think life is a grave matter. But marriage has done that. Marriage is heavy. It is all the meaning in the world.