After a six-month stint in Australia, Heston Blumenthal’s world-famous restaurant, the Fat Duck, reopens in Bray tomorrow (29 September). Details remain sketchy as to what, after a £2.5m refit, has changed at the new-look Duck, although Blumenthal says the menu – now christened the Journey – will be a story, its dishes chapters with such enigmatic names as “Can I have some money for the ice-cream man?”. A mini mechanical sweet shop, which cost £150,000, will serve part of the dessert course. So far, so mysterious. But there is one concrete fact we know about this four-hour experience, and that is its price-tag. It will set you back £255 a head (£286.87 with “discretionary” 12.5% service). This is a figure which, and I speak as a fan, is indefensible. When I visited the Fat Duck, back in 2008, I felt that, as a once-in-a-lifetime experience, the £315 we paid for meals, drinks and service for two, constituted good value, in its way. After all, this was not just any posh restaurant; it held three Michelin stars and was second only to the now closed El Bulli in terms of global influence. Blumenthal was the paradigm-shifting madcap molecular genius of British cooking. It was unlike any meal I have eaten before or since. The Fat Duck mattered. But not to the extent that I would fork out £640, which, as a ballpark-figure, is what, with pre-dinner G&Ts, one decent bottle of wine and 12.5% service, a meal for two at the Bray restaurant will now cost. No meal is worth that, no matter how sensational. For most people, since 2008, wages have stagnated or dropped in real terms, while the cost of eating at the Fat Duck has more than doubled. Where once (first world problem alert!) a significant number of people could reasonably have saved up to eat at the Fat Duck, it will now, increasingly, be the preserve of a narrow band of very wealthy people – particularly as you must now pay upfront through a ticketed system. Suddenly, it seems as remote and ridiculous as those rococo Paris palaces of fayn dayning where no-one blinks at the €100 starters. All this is a shame. Because where those ludicrous gilded French confections are – like most Michelin star restaurants, internationally – doing little that is genuinely original or thrilling, the Fat Duck was. And it may well do so again. Despite the slightly worrying way in which Blumenthal is still banging-on about nostalgia and Alice in Wonderland. The Fat Duck is a unique cultural entity that ideally would be open to a much wider demographic. But despite charging these astronomical sums, Blumenthal insists the restaurant is not significantly profitable. Is it not time, then, to look at other models of funding? A Fat Duck that is only accessible to a tiny elite is at best a curio, if not a source of resentment. A democratic Fat Duck would be a point of national pride and far more enjoyable for the people who worked there. Who wants to feed the jaded super-rich when you could be serving genuinely excited new customers? So, how could Heston Blumenthal subsidise a new, socially inclusive Fat Duck? What better for the Willy Wonka of British gastronomy, than choosing who dines at the Fat Duck by lottery? The restaurant gets 30,000 booking enquiries a day and is open for, roughly, 260 days-a-year. If 10% of those applicants bought a £10 lottery ticket, that would generate £7.8m annually (before wine sales, service charge etc). As opposed to the approximately £8.32m that the restaurant will make, over 12 months, assuming its 80 covers a day spend £400-a-head. From Marco Pierre White’s Knorr stock cubes to Michel Roux Jr’s new Lexus, top chefs often work as brand ambassadors. Most notably, in Spain, Telefónica has helped fund the El Bulli foundation as part of its association with Ferran Adrià. Blumenthal has Waitrose, Little Chef and, erm, Vision Express on his CV, but could he forge a more lucrative partnership that would subsidise a cheaper Fat Duck menu? Who would begrudge a Heinz-Heston hook-up or a collaboration with Dr Oetker, as long as that money was being used philanthropically in Bray? In short, Blumenthal needs to take one for the team (us). Can food be art? No. It is a craft skill that aims to deliver heightened pleasure. However, certainly at the Fat Duck’s rarefied level, food has a cultural value that could, perhaps, see it qualify for public funding. The Arts Council England, for instance, has supported various events that include a food element or which use food in the creation of art. Heston, get filling in those funding applications. Football fans and music lovers have had to learn to tolerate the (emotionally contentious) corporate sponsorship of hallowed grounds and music venues, but restaurants have yet to exploit the naming rights and sponsorship deals that, for globally famous brands such as the Fat Duck, would surely be a productive revenue stream. Banks are a good target, they always need positive publicity, and Vodafone’s HQ is close to the Fat Duck in Newbury. Perfect. Double the price of the tasting menu for those wealthy diners who wish to book in advance, but give half the tables away for free each day, on a first-come, first-served basis. It may be the only way I ever get to eat there again.