At first sight, you would think something terrible had happened to the town centre of Kirkby. And in a way, it has. To all intents and purposes, this is a new town, built in the 1950s and 60s to house human “overspill” from Liverpool, 10 miles to the south-west. Its main feature is the modernist shopping centre that runs down Cherryfield Drive, Kirkby’s main drag – though these days, any visitor’s attention is more likely to be drawn to what sits on the other side of the road: two great mountains of rubble, which then give way to a strip of boarded-up buildings and an expanse of empty houses, some of which are already being demolished. Look closely, and you can see curtains still draped in the windows, different shades of wallpaper, and, among the nearby debris, traces of the lives now being lived somewhere else. Nestling next to bricks and severed pipes are satellite dishes, garden furniture and a child’s car window shade featuring the incongruous image of Disney’s Winnie the Pooh. All of this sits behind a tangle of steel fences, and hoardings that feature the Tesco logo, along with the insignia of Spenhill – one of the supermarket giant’s subsidiaries, which specialises in construction – and a slogan that now has a grimly ironic ring: “Making life better.” A huge Tesco supermarket – and retail park – was meant to be coming to Kirkby. But last month, the company announced that the town was one of 49 places that wouldn’t be getting one after all. Local people are angry, baffled and, in some cases, still optimistic that the development plan might be rescued. This story is complicated. Tesco might have abandoned its new supermarket, but it still owns the lion’s share of Kirkby’s town centre, which it bought for £65m and was going to redevelop as part of its plans. The day I arrive, as if to prove that it still wants to do right by the place, paving stones are being ripped up as part of what the borough council calls Tesco’s “ongoing work to transform public spaces”. More sceptical voices say they have already had a bellyful of Tesco’s idea of transformation, and the results are clear to see: abandoned playing fields, a demolished former hotel and nursing home, and the closed-down former home of the local Council for Voluntary Service. The biggest source of fury, though, is the 72 homes whose occupants were moved to brand new houses elsewhere in the town in preparation for Tesco’s arrival – all structurally sound, but still destined for demolition. My guides are three of the founders of a pressure group-cum-political party called 1st 4 Kirkby, founded to try to break through what they see as deadened local politics (there are 63 councillors in the borough of Knowsley, all of them Labour), and push for a very different regeneration plan. “Kirkby is not a particularly prosperous town,” says Matt Donnelly, 27. “It needed regeneration 20 years ago. The economy of the borough is on its backside. Just recently, we had a communication from the leader of the council, asking us all to shop locally to boost the local economy.” He looks out the window. “But who’s going to come to the town centre now?” Tesco’s descent into crisis and uncertainty has been dramatic. In 2012, it announced its first fall in profits in 20 years (to £2.5bn), boasted of new investment in a £1bn “makeover”, and served notice that it was calming its aggressive plans for expansion. The next year, pre-tax profits dropped by a cool 51%. By early 2014, Tesco was issuing profit warnings, as their market share tumbled to its lowest in 10 years, and in September, it was revealed the company had overstated its profits by £250m. In early 2015 news broke of those 49 cancelled projects – in places ranging from Aviemore in Scotland to Dartford in Kent – and, in turn, 43 existing supermarkets set to close. This fit of streamlining caused Tesco’s share price to bounce up, but the company’s new chief executive, Dave Lewis, said he was announcing the cancellations “with a heavy heart”. He went on: “My absolute imperative has to be to protect the future of our business for the 300,000 colleagues we employ in communities all over the UK. I know that this news will be a real disappointment to many and we’re extremely grateful for the support we’ve received for each of the 49 projects. I am very aware of the importance of our sites to their local areas and I am determined that we will work closely with local councils to find the right solution for each community.” Underneath the statistics, there are two intertwined stories. One is about the fate of places that had either pinned all their hopes on Tesco’s arrival, or opposed its plans from the start. The other is the demise of what has effectively become Britain’s only viable model of regeneration, and the fact that no one seems to have a clue what might replace it. By the mid-1990s, this regeneration strategy was well established: base your plans on an “anchor store” and attract one of the big four supermarkets. If you were lucky, whichever store had designs on your neighbourhood might extend its proposals to an entire retail development, and perhaps assent to a so-called Section 106 agreement (a reference to part of the 1990 Planning Act), and build not just a big store and a handful of satellite shops, but something for the local community: a new library, say, or a public square. If you were less fortunate, you would just get a bog-standard supermarket. Throughout the 1990s and all the way up to the crash of 2008 and beyond, this was how whole swaths of Britain were rebuilt, and Tesco led the charge, to the point that it sometimes seemed to be a wing of government, and some people began to fear the dystopia crystallised in the title of Andrew Simms’s best-selling book Tescopoly. Now, though, Tesco is in retreat, and its sudden withdrawal from scores of places has left behind resentment, anger and what feels like a strange state of shock. On a freezing Tuesday afternoon in Bridgwater, the Somerset town that sits next to the M5, 35 miles south-west of Bristol, I meet some of the people who have spent six years opposing the now-abandoned plans for their town centre. The first thing I see is a vast expanse of grey gravel, extending into the distance: what would have been a cluster of shops surrounding a new Tesco, on a site between the town centre and the old docks, and eating into a much-used park called the Brewery Field. This used to be the site of a big leisure centre, the Sedgemoor Splash, built in 1991 and based around a huge swimming pool with slides and wave machines, which, say some locals, attracted visitors from as far away as South Wales. But in 2009, Sedgemoor district council announced it was to close, claiming it was losing money and in need of repairs. The day before it finally shut its doors on 31 August 2009, it was occupied by protesters, incensed by the news that once the site had been cleared, it was to be the home of a new Tesco Extra. The occupiers claimed the pool had simply been shut to make way for a supermarket, and that Tesco was in the frame long before it was closed; Sedgemoor council says the pool’s closure and negotiations with Tesco “were two separate processes which overlapped at some stages”. Whatever, local people opposed to the development founded a campaign group called Bridgwater Forward, and the row simmered for the next four years. A replacement pool was promised, but it took more than three years to open, on the site of a school a mile and a half out of town, well away from most local bus routes. A facility for people with learning difficulties on Tesco’s intended site – owned by Somerset county council, which, for some reason, donated £20,000 to Tesco’s planning fees – also had to find a new home. Given that Bridgwater already has a Sainsbury’s, an Asda and a Morrisons – as well as eight other supermarkets of various sizes – there was widespread bafflement about why the town needed another. Party politics were also streaked through the story: though Sedgemoor council is Conservative-run, Bridgwater has a long tradition of Labour-voting, and local politicians felt the Tesco plan was yet another example of folly and stupidity being imposed from outside. The borough council finally approved Tesco’s plans in February 2013. Then, at the end of last year, news leaked out that Tesco was not coming after all. For Labour councillors Brian Smedley and Ian Tucker, and Glen Burrows, a local woman who is one of the founders of Bridgwater Forward, there is a mixture of relief and seething frustration at how this story played out. “I’m glad; I’m really glad,” says Burrows. “But it was market forces that stopped Tesco, not the fact that we had a massive campaign, and we had all the arguments. The council should have listened to us, and they didn’t. That’s the biggest lesson: the fact that we’ve got a problem with democracy.” The council claims the pool was demolished as “a purely financial decision”, because it no longer had the money to support it, but she is having none of that. “It got knocked down, because they wanted to flog the land to Tesco,” she says. “We lost something fabulous. It was used; it was popular. We lost all of that: an asset to the town, available to disabled people and elderly people – and for nothing.” Quite what will now replace it is now unclear: with their customarily elegant use of English, Sedgemoor council will only say that “further consultation will be had with the public and key stakeholders, with such consultation having due regard to the need to deliver any new project at no cost, apart from feasibility funds”. If the timescale of the Bridgwater story seems achingly long, it has nothing on the epic tale of uncertainty seen in Wolverhampton, where Tesco’s plans for a vast supermarket have also come to nothing. It was meant to be built on the site of the town’s old Royal Hospital, a Grade II listed building. Indeed, the morning I arrive, behind imposing wooden walls done out in Tesco’s trademark red and blue, construction workers in hi-vis jackets and hard hats are busy doing what Tesco calls “restorative works”, expected to be completed by the spring – but the rattles and bangs that echo around the site offer no hope of any real conclusion to this story. Tesco bought the hospital site in 2000, and promised a huge regeneration scheme that would also include other shops, offices and “community facilities”. But they soon locked horns with Sainsbury’s over another site in the city, and their plans fell into inertia. As far back as 2007, rumours begin to circulate that they would not be building the scheme after all – though at the start of 2014, the local Labour MP Pat McFadden received assurances everything would go ahead. McFadden has recently accused Tesco of “a betrayal of the people of Wolverhampton”. The Royal Hospital – or what remains of it – is the main landmark in an area known as All Saints, Wolverhampton’s red-light district, named after the church that looks out on to the hospital site. For the last eight years, its vicar has been Sarah Schofield, a thoughtful and passionate emigree from Manchester, who was hurled into the Tesco story as soon as she took her current job. She talks about what Tesco has – or, rather, hasn’t – done in terms of poor ethics, and “total neglect”. “The children who were born the year Tesco took on the site are now starting their GCSEs,” she says. “That, to me, is a frightening fact.” Schofield went along with the idea that, on balance, Tesco’s arrival would be a good thing: “Decent jobs … and cheap, fresh vegetables.” But around four years ago, she says, she began to lose faith. “Tesco sacked their PR company then,” she says. “And I thought: ‘If you’ve not got a PR operation, you’re obviously not planning to open any time soon.’ But their line was always, ‘It’s about to happen.’ There’s a line in the Anglican liturgy: ‘The hope of glory to come.’ It was like that.” As time went on, she says, the mood of the All Saints neighbourhood came to be defined by the empty expanse of land at its heart. “After a while, people lose any sense of confidence in their own power,” she says. “You can’t get people to take an interest in how to effect change, because they’ve seen a case study in how not to effect change. Involvement in local politics is fairly poor, you don’t get residents groups …” Tesco’s current line on Wolverhampton is that, despite its withdrawal, “all parties are committed to bringing forward the development of the site as soon as possible, and engaging with the local community throughout this process”, and “at the first available opportunity” the company will “update the local community on progress and the potential viable uses for the site”. Schofield translates this crisply. “I think it’ll sit as it is, for another few years,” she says. Back in Kirkby, campaigners were also broadly sympathetic to the principle of a new supermarket for the town. Besides a cramped and rather shabby branch of the Co-op, the nearest is five miles away down the M57. “When we first met Tesco, I said that they would probably have the very unusual circumstances of being welcomed into this town by all the residents, because we haven’t had a decent supermarket here since the early 1980s,” says 1st 4 Kirkby co-founder Dave Kelly. He and his fellow campaigners, though, were perplexed about why Tesco wouldn’t entertain the idea of building something in the existing town centre – which, they pointed out, already contained a huge vacant supermarket, left behind by Asda in 1984. Kirkby’s Tesco story goes back to 2006, when Everton Football Club announced it wanted to leave its age-old home at Goodison Park in north Liverpool and relocate to a new site in Kirkby, which would also include a Tesco Extra and retail park. The plan was thrown out by the-then Labour government. In 2013, Tesco was still promising to come. “Hoardings went up,” says Donnelly. “We were told Tesco were definitely coming. Labour councillors were putting out leaflets with a timeline: they gave total assurances that they were on their way. Even in November last year, they were still saying they were coming.” As it turned out, though, they were not. The Kirkby campaigners think the council’s biggest mistake was the signing of an exclusivity agreement with Tesco that ruled out negotiations with other potential developers. In response, Dave Lonergan, the borough councillor in charge of “regeneration, economy and skills”, says that if they hadn’t done that deal, “Tesco would have walked away”. Local sceptics reckon the idea of any new developer being interested in acres of scrubland and rubble is a forlorn hope; Lonergan says the council has recently been “in discussions with other retailers and developers who have expressed an interest in stepping into replace Tesco”. And though plenty of people in Kirkby think the demolition of houses to clear the way for something that may never arrive is close to madness, Lonergan insists that “the site where the disused and vacant homes stand … is still needed for future development”. In the town centre, I pop into a barber’s called Billy Wizz, which has been here for seven years, and now pays its rent to Tesco. Local people, the staff tell me, are annoyed by the latest turn of events, and an array of empty shops testifies to nearly a decade of uncertainty: in effect, a plan for regeneration achieving its exact opposite. Given that Tesco isn’t coming, how do people here feel about all those empty houses? The answer is unexpected. “If someone else is going to come along,” says 43-year-old Carol Gorman, “you’re going to have to clear the space. And now that has happened. So it’s more appealing.” Never mind the rise of the discounters, the fall of one of the big four supermarkets, and the fact that an entire model of regeneration might have bitten the dust: she and her colleagues, she says, have heard rumours that another chain might be on its way. Round here, at least, hope apparently springs eternal. So who exactly is meant to coming? “Asda,” she says. “That’s what we’ve heard, anyway.” • This article was amended on 4 February 2015 to correct a reference to the cancellation of a Tesco store planned for Dartmouth, Kent. This should have read Dartford, Kent.