When I speak about my brother, people assume I’m talking about Boris or Jo. But I have Leo, too, who isn’t an MP. He’s my non-political, talented and very successful younger brother who dedicates his life to environmental sustainability – I’m so lucky to have him. I cannot fault the man – or any of my brothers. They probably think I’m ghastly, but God was smiling down on me when he gave me them. Nobody compares, which can’t be easy for my husband. Leo makes me laugh a lot. When he was little he’d jump on to the table and dance reggae style. He’s in a band, not that he’d tell you. He doesn’t seek the spotlight like the rest of us. But he’s so handsome! He’s a perfect mix of Michael York and Jeff Bridges. He walked into a London hotel recently and every woman looked round. I admire him so much as a father. We all went to Center Parcs recently and for the 36 hours we were there, Leo spent 30 of them in the pool playing with the kids. We talk to each other openly and honestly. Growing up around brothers, I could have become toughened, but actually the opposite happened. I used to think it was the most tragic injustice that I’d been born a girl. Not that I wanted to transition or anything, but being the only girl amongst boys, it was perhaps inevitable that I’d be a tomboy who despised wearing dresses. But it’s held me in good stead – we’re all protective of each other. You don’t mess with the Johnsons. Leo is co-presenting a brand new Radio 4 series called Future Proofing about the big ideas shaping the future and changes in our identities. He’s doing something so worthwhile. Fresh Hell by Rachel Johnson is out now. To order a copy for £5.99, go to bookshop.theguardian.com Rachel is my only sister and one of a kind. She’s a born anarchist with an instinctive desire to make things more fun. She’s an anti-boredom mini nuke. Once, when we were all kids in nappies, she encouraged us to fill all the shoes and boots in the house with water. When Mum discovered this, she went berserk. Somehow, though – because of Rachel’s analgesic quality – we didn’t feel the pain of being punished. I remember lying with Rachel and Boris, all of us crying with laughter, as we were threatened with punishment. The only fight we have ever had was when I was eight and she was 10. She pinned me down and I remember lying there on the ground thinking – this isn’t how it’s supposed to be. Rachel gave me a strong sense that women are stronger, tougher, more dynamic and can take more pain than men. I encourage my kids to hit tennis balls as hard as she does and give them a pound every time they succeed. One of the things I love most about Rachel is her incredible straightness. She’s defiant and does what she enjoys and she’s got where she has today not through plotting for world domination but by just being herself . She refuses to succumb to limits and I wish I could learn to be more like that. Yes, I’m in a band. It’s a midlife crisis. I don’t know if Boris and Jo know. I’ve only told Rachel. In the past decade I have discovered how nurturing and emotionally intelligent Rachel is. If anything is upsetting me, I’ll go to her and she won’t be “Rachel Johnson”. She’s nonjudgmental and can laugh at herself first and foremost, and I just love her. My wife loves her, too, and she and I hardly agree on anything.