Like smoking on planes and transporting toddlers in cars without tying them up first, a little inebriation to break up a working day is one of those things that in a generation has moved from normal to, “Oh my God, can you believe we ever did that?” Obviously, boozy lunches aren’t actually illegal. But you, the lunchtime drinker, know that when a daytime dining companion suggests ordering a bottle of wine, agreement is conspiracy. Or a test you’re about to fail. You also know, when a dining companion says, “Just water for me!” that you really could and should have done whatever you’re about to do over the phone. Or you think you do, anyway. The truth is that drinking at lunchtime is stupid and irresponsible. That’s what makes it such fun. As for having just one or two glasses, the essential paradox of alcohol is that the less you imbibe, the more you feel its effects. After one glass (feel free to adjust for personal tolerances, you dipso), one is aware that one is more relaxed than optimum cut-throat marketplace sharpness demands. After two, one is in longing-for-an-afternoon-nap territory. After three, one is top of the world, thrumming with confidence, one’s excellent judgment assuring one that another glass won’t do any harm at all. After which anything can happen, as long as it’s bad. Alcohol is a gateway drug, paving the way for more alcohol. This has been known to the west since the ancient Greeks so sensibly formalised the ritual of binge-drinking into a form of worship. The high point of my own lunchtime drinking life came about 10 years ago, when lunch with a friend was brought to an end by kindly waiters gently explaining that, much as it pained them, they really needed our table because dinner service was in full swing. Obviously, this was confusing for us. Holding one of our own fingers in front of our own noses was confusing for us. Somehow, we had managed to have lunch for seven and a half brief hours. Drinking at lunchtime is stupid and irresponsible. That's what makes it such fun We had been celebrating. Not at first, but after ordering our first bottle of wine (at that point, as we’d imagined, our only bottle of wine), we decided it was corked. Summoning the waiter, we told him of our verdict. A single sip and he confirmed that we were very much correct, confiding also that we were discerning women of the world and a pleasure to serve, because most of the world’s idiots glugged away at corked wine without the smallest suspicion that what they were drinking was not delicious, but rank. Well, he didn’t actually say that. We said that. We were so pleased with ourselves for detecting corked wine that we had a few more goes, to check that our new superpower was not a fluke. A sensible waiter would have given us the corked wine again, as bottle three. But our waiter didn’t, because he adored us. OK, I made that up, too. The next day – realistically, it was probably two or three days later – I told a hard-drinking colleague of our Great Feat. “Wow!” he said. “So who else was there?” “Just us.” “Eh? What on Earth did you two find to talk about for seven and a half bloody hours?” In fact, both freelance journalists and the mothers of small children, we’d talked first about how we could rearrange our working day to accommodate an extra hour or so of lunch, and next about how we could rearrange our picking- up-the-kids-from-school day to accommodate another extra hour or so of lunch. We then had to have these conversations again the next day, over the phone, because of our terrible hangovers. Clearly, some corked wine had indeed crept into the proceedings. There is no other explanation. It’s pretty dreadful, screwing up your work for the sake of a drink. It’s really awful, screwing up your responsibilities to your children for the sake of a drink. I’m not proud. Except I made that up, too. I am proud. I regret nothing. It was a golden afternoon. We may not have been officially worshipping gods, but for one day, we were both Ferris Bueller and we both had a day off. The memory still gladdens my heart. That’s how much I needed a day off. We were so pleased with ourselves for detecting corked wine that we had a few more goes I understand that this is a tale of privileged women who have the luxury of being able to behave badly without suffering too many consequences, but there was a time when this sort of behaviour was a little more universal. Outside the gates of Ravenscraig, the huge steelworks that dominated my home town, Motherwell, was a pub called the Cleekim Inn. It was a bare-faced acknowledgment that a drink before your shift began could turn into a few drinks, and that the solution was to get a workmate to punch your card for you. Some of the men were alcoholics, and abused this unofficial system routinely. You could argue that this was a particularly egregious example of how liberty-taking was rife in nationalised industries. Except that I look at our denationalised age and think about how much better it was for all concerned, especially their wives and children, that these men had a wage, security and a place to go and hide, a place to lose themselves that wasn’t home or the dole office. Drinking when you should be working was a bit of a gesture of defiance back then, and it’s a gesture of defiance so huge now that it’s a dying tradition. Young people now drink less, it’s said, than for many generations. They’re more sensible, it’s said, more focused. I think, though, that they’re just more fearful. Work, money, success, security: most of us live in fear of not achieving them or not retaining them. Moderation in all things, except dedication to good sense and duty, is the order of the day. One drink at lunch is rebellion. Two is sedition. Three is revolution. The boozy lunch may be rare now, but when a boozy lunch does come along, it’s just wonderful.