My first chemotherapy session was excruciating. I got home and passed out and felt so awful and exhausted and nauseated and like it was the worst thing ever. I wondered what I had done to deserve it. I had, thinking back on what really mattered, lived an exemplary life. I don’t just mean that I graduated from Harvard and Yale Law school with highest honours. That is not what matters. I mean I have not lost anyone along the way. No one ever gets over me. No one ever gives up on me. People disappear, sometimes even for years, but they always come back. I’ve learned that when someone says “I hate your guts”, it’s just the beginning of the negotiation. They’ll be back. I’m impossible to let go. Do you hate charisma? Oh, who doesn’t. Everyone can’t stand it. You can’t bargain with it. It’s the bogeyman of personality. Well that’s me. I apologise. I admit I was wrong. I take the blame. I say, I miss you. I say, I can’t live without you. I say, this isn’t right. I say, I love you. People love to hear what they love to hear. And I mean it. I know how to win people over. I know how to win readers over. I’m doing it right now. I know how to get people on my side from a distance, and that’s a pretty neat trick. I accept that cancer is affecting me. But I don’t want it to change my life. I don’t want to give an illness that power It is because I am honest. It is because I am not afraid. If it happens to anyone, it happens to me. I was given Viagra to counteract the sexual side effects of antidepressants. That happened. So it figures I would get breast cancer. It even makes sense I would get aggressive premenopausal breast cancer as a result of the BRCA2 mutation. It does not scare me. But the treatment is excruciating. The night after my first chemotherapy session, I was swearing to my fiance that I would not go through it again. I was nauseated. I was exhausted like I’d just spent 40 years in the desert making the exodus from Egypt to Canaan. I did not care if cancer killed me, just not another night like this. But then the next morning, I felt OK. And I don’t want to die. I have too much left to do. All my mistakes are on the way to getting it right. All my failures are en route to success. I never lost a game; I only ran out of time. I can’t run out of time. I don’t want cancer to change my life. People say it does. I guess it must. Everything does. We are affected by it all. This happens, that happens, we change. A delay on the subway, someone crashes their shopping trolley into us and it feels like an assault, all these little unimportant things change us. So I guess cancer has got to get to me. It is getting to me, of course. It’s going to mess up my hair. It makes me tired, and worse, it makes me cranky. I accept that cancer is affecting me. But I don’t want it to change my life. I don’t want it to make me a better, worse, or even just a different person. I don’t want to give an illness that power. I spent much of my life battling who I am. I am now at peace. I’m good. I don’t need a new version. I am not obsolete. Cancer would win – not if it killed me, but if it changed me. It is a problem to be solved. It is not a revelation from on high. But it already has surprised me. I did not know I was this tough. I did not know I could take this much pain without crying or complaining. I did not know I had this kind of composure. I appreciate the peace in the doctors I work with, how they worry about life and death, not Kim and Kanye. I appreciate how this removes me from normal concerns, at least somewhat. I still got married during the chemotherapy. I am still knitting one of my dearest friends a scarf. I still went to New Haven to talk to a class at Yale that read Prozac Nation, as I do every year, and had dinner with students, even though it was a long day. I am still mourning my dog Augusta constantly, because I lost her and I lost a piece of me I will never get back, and that does make me cry, that makes me wail. I am still writing, and thinking about law, and going out to dinner. I am still me.